This lecture might seem
a bit backwards to some.
You've already learned how
to manipulate DataFrames,
loading data from structured
formats such as CSVs.
But there's many more
common data formats,
the pandas can help you with.
I think it's important
to have a bit more of
a comprehensive look
at data storage.
So here we're going to expand
our investigation to
other data formats.
Let's import the pandas library.
So import pandas as pd.
All right. Let's talk
about CSVs first.
One of the most common and
easiest files to work with is
a CSV file or comma
separated text file.
Loading, reading and
writing CSV files
is a key skill to master
for any data scientist.
To review, a CSV file
is a text file where
values or columns are
separated by commas.
CSV is quick to read
and it's compatible
with most platforms,
and you can even open
a CSV file within
the text editor
built into Jupyter.
While CSV is very easy to load,
real-world data rarely contains
clean data in these cases,
and there's a few different
pandas functions that can
help with messy data here.
This is an example of
a CSV file I pulled from
Google containing data
on national education.
So we'll say df equals
pd.read_csv datasets,
and it's called National-2018.
Let's look at the head of that.
So we can summarize the values of
unique values for
a specific column.
So the most frequently
occurring element
and how much they
occur using this
value_counts function.
So df_qualification.value_counts.
So we see that our DataFrame
was printed out first.
So we get all of the columns or
rather the head of
the DataFrame was,
and then we can see some summary
information as well.
When you load a CSV file,
Python knows that the values
will be separated by commas,
but CSV values don't
contain any type of
information for the data.
So pandas infers
the datatypes unless you
specify the value type for
columns with a dtype parameter.
We can quickly see
the datatype inferred by
pandas using the
DataFrame.dtypes attributes.
So let's just say df.dtypes,
we can see here all of
the columns and all
of the datatypes.
In this case because it
was lowered from the CSV,
these were inferred by pandas.
Usually, the first row in
a CSV file contains
the names of the columns
for the data,
and when it doesn't, you can
either specify columns yourself
or let pandas insert an
auto-incrementing number instead.
A handy option is to
actually use the index of
the DataFrame to be one of
the columns as well on load.
So I'll regularly do this.
So pd.read_csv.
I'll bring in National CSV,
and I'll just say
index col equals one.
So I wanted it be
the second item.
Then let's look at
the head of this.
So here we see that
qualification was picked up.
You can also insert a multi index
by just providing a list,
and you can use
the column names as inferred
from the first row
instead of a number.
So here we'll just pd.read_csv,
bring in the CSV file
and set our index call.
Here we'll just set
it to be a list of
year level and academic gear,
and look at the head of that.
We see here it's a multi index,
year level is
the outermost index and
academic year and next.
Sometimes the formatting
issue can occur,
preventing you from working
with your data at all.
While you should always
ensure that you're
working with the data
that you want to,
it's sometimes useful to skip
troublesome rows for
data exploration.
In truth, I do this quite
a bit for exploration,
but it really is
important to make
sure you understand why you have
to skip data when it comes
to reporting some result.
So pd.read_csv,
bringing the CSV file,
and then you can just say
which rows you want to skip.
So skip rows equals
one, two, three.
Then let's look at
the head of this.
We can see that we skipped
a number of those rows.
Sometimes you're dealing
with large CSVs and
reading them in in
one operation is intractable.
To help deal with this, you
can give pandas a chunk size,
then iterate over the DataFrames
in a chunk by chunk manner.
So here's an example.
We'll create a new
chunking iterator,
and the key is it's in iterator.
Then pd.read_csv, bring in
our data sets and say chunk size,
and we'll just say it's
equal to 13 lines.
So now we've got
this iterable item.
So we say i equals zero
for piece and chunker.
Let's just print out.
Chunk has some rows,
and we'll pass in our chunk
information and the length of
the number of rows and
increment i, and run that.
So I use this when I've fairly
extensive data cleaning or
processing routine that I want to
run on large data files,
and I wanted both reduce
overall memory usage
as well as improved
CPU utilization.
Now, this isn't particularly
important for this class,
but as you progress
as a data scientist,
there will come a time
when you need to load
data and to work
with biggish data,
and data that you
should be able to work
with on a laptop, but can't.
Knowing that there's
places to investigate
further is actually
really important.
Something you should be aware,
with chunking, however,
is that the pandas type inference
works on a chunk by chunk size.
So your types might end up
being a bit unpredictable.
In the above example,
there's one cell in
the academic year column
which has a non-number.
When we read in
the whole DataFrame,
this is red and
the type of object.
But when we read it in chunks,
we see that this is only
an object for one chunk.
So for piece in pd.read_csv,
and we'll set our chunk size
again to Lucky 13.
Then we're actually
just going to print out
P_academic year and what
its data type was inferred as,
and we'll increment i.
Here we can see that one of
those chunks is
different than the rest.
So it's actually
an appropriate Int64,
and most places but
an object in others.
Perhaps even more ubiquitous than
CSV files in the corporate
world or Excel files.
You'll find that much
of the data created or
given to you might be
trapped in this format.
Using the excellent xlrd library,
pandas is able to read this
almost as seamlessly
as CSV files.
Important difference
from CSV files is that
a single Excel workbook
might contain many sheets.
Each is analogous to a DataFrame.
So let's load some data
from a report card on
elementary districts
from 2016 and 2017.
Here I'll just look
at the one sheet,
the primary class sizes.
So we say pd.read_excel,
actually read_ is great just
to explore all of the
different options available.
I will pulling datasets
classsizes.xlsx.
I will set the sheet name
to primary class sizes,
and let's look at
the head of that.
Our table doesn't actually
look very useful.
So let's take a look at what
this looks like in Excel.
So here, I'll just
load a picture of what
this looks like in Excel.
Okay. So this is a pretty typical
data file you might be
handed to work with.
We see that a number of
different rows being
taken up with graphics,
and then like colors
being used for headers,
and that there are
at least two different
DataFrames on this page.
To deal with this, you're going
to want to use a number of
different options in
the read_excel function.
Excel numbers, it's row
starting at one, but we don't.
We start at zero. Excel has
columns starting with A,
but with pandas, we use
numbers instead of letters.
Again, starting at zero.
So let's grab that top table
into a DataFrame.
So I'm going to say df
equals pd.read_excel.
I give it the path to
the Excel file classsizes.xlsx.
I set the sheet name
that I'm interested in,
and then I'm going to
parameterize a bunch
of other things.
So I'm going to say the header,
we actually want Row 7.
We're going to skip
the footer at 19.
We want the index
column to be zero,
and we're going to
set a dtype here.
We're going to say that
the average class size
is going to be of type string.
Let's look at the head
of that DataFrame.
So that's pretty handy to
be able to do in Excel,
to actually quickly pull that
into a pandas DataFrame.
In the corporate world when
somebody gives you an Excel file,
they often don't want to be
changing that Excel file,
maybe the data values
change in it over time.
They might not know how
to export it as a CSV.
So being able to take and
work with the Excel file
quickly and to write
some code to do that
is really quite handy.
The easiest way to store
data in a binary format is
using Python's built-in
pickles serialization.
Now, this isn't actually
a Pandas library,
this is built into
the language itself.
It's quick and easy to
dump an object like
a dataframe to a file to
use it for later use.
There's lots of caveats to
doing this and I wouldn't
recommend it over some of
the other formats
we'll talk about.
But if you're working mostly
with Python developers,
you will undoubtedly
need to use it.
One of the most useful parts
of pickle versus some of
the other formats
we've talked about
is that data types are preserved,
so you could do all your
cleaning and typing in
one file and then share
the object with others.
So first let's import
the pickle library
that's built into Python
so import pickle,
and now we're going to create
the pickle file that we
actually want to write to.
So we do this with
the file just with open.
I'll call it dataframe.pickle,
and WB stands for
"write binary" as f,
so now we have a file handle
with f. Now we just tell
Python to dump our dataframe from
the previous example
into this pickle file.
So pickle.dump df and we
want it to go into f,
and then when we finish
the with statement,
we automatically close
all of our file handles.
When we want to read it in again,
we can do so pretty easily.
So similar thing with
open dataframe.pickle,
here I'll say read
binary, rb as f,
and we'll create some new
variable our_old_dataframe
equals pickled.load f,
and then let's look
at our_old_dataframe,
and we see our
old_dataframe is there.
Pickle files are a quick and
easy way to store dataframes,
and I find that sometimes
I use them when I
need to save intermediate
dataframes in particular.
For instance, when
I'm working with
large dataframes on a machine
with a limited amount of memory,
or when I need to
distribute portions of
a dataframe to different
processes or machines.
I also use these regularly
for intermediate work,
and so I'll be working,
I'll do a lot of manipulation
on a dataframe that
takes some time,
then I'll want to dump that,
and then I can start to work from
that the next day
when I come back.
HDF5 is used when you're
working with very large datasets,
and it's especially useful for
datasets that won't
fit into memory.
HDF stands for
Hierarchical Data Format
and each HDF5 file
can store multiple
datasets as well as
supporting metadata like
column information.
HDF5 supports on
the fly compression
with a variety of
compression modes,
enabling data with
repeated patterns
to be stored more efficiently.
So let's bring in
the numpy library.
So import numpy as np,
and then you use HDF5,
we first create
our data stores or files,
so I'll create
a variable store is equal to
pd.HDFStore and we'll
just call it mydata.h5.
Then we can insert
into that store
different dataframes or
even portions of dataframes.
So I can say store
subclass_sizes equals dataframe,
or I can say store subclass_size
2009 equals DF sub 2009,
I'm just project a column
into that dataframe.
Let's take a look
at what store is.
So you can see
what keys are available
in the HDFStore with.keys.
So store.keys, and we can see
that we've got five
different keys in this one.
Objects contained in
the HDF5 file can then be
retrieved using the same
dict-like API, the selector.
So store
subclass_sizes.head pulls
out for us the class
sizes dataframe.
But where HDF5 really shines is
when you save an object
of type table.
So here we can say store.put,
a new class size,
we'll call that, we'll put
the dataframe in and we'll
format this as a table.
Let's look at the store.keys now.
When you do this, you
can retrieve portions of
your dataframe from disk without
having to read the whole
dataframe into memory.
So in this way, it's actually
a lot like a database.
So to do that, we would do
store.select and then we
would say a new class size,
and then we can add
a where clause,
so where the index equals prep,
and we want to return
the columns 2009 and 2010.
We can run that and we
see that we actually get
just that row and
just those columns.
So you can see that we can store
the data on disk and we
don't actually have to
read it all into memory
to begin to work with it.
A deeper investigation of
HDF5 is outside the scope
of this lecture,
but I would encourage
you to check it out
in the online docs and
play with it a bit,
especially the novel
hierarchical nature of the data.
Where it is used most commonly
is large scientific datasets
which are collected once but
actually read many many times.
A more common alternative,
which we won't cover
in this course due
to the size and complexity of it,
are relational databases, and
there's several ways
of interacting with
these data sources from
within Python and pandas.
The last data file format I'll
talk about here is pyarrow,
and the feather format.
The feather format is
an open-source
columnar storage data,
so a dataframe format,
which is intended to be
a replacement for CSV
files and is both
faster to read and write as
well as preserves
metadata about columns.
So let's do some time
comparisons reading in
the same dataframe from
both CSV and feather formats.
So I'll use the magic cell,
time it here, so I'm going
to run this cell 10 times.
First, let's test
the CSV reading,
so we'll work just df_csv
equals pd read_csv datasets,
and here we'll read in
these house_prices.csv.
Now, let's try it with feather.
So time it n 10,
now we'll try with the feather
and df_feather equals
pd.read_feather.
It looks the same, we
just give it a link
to the feather file,
house_prices.feather.
So we see that feather reading
is moderately faster.
Let's look at the dataframe
types and compare them.
So we'll load our CSV file
from the dataset,
and we'll print out
the types in there,
and we'll load the feather file,
and we'll print out the types.
Let's compare these.
One difference we can see is
that the sale date field is
correctly set to a date_time
64 in the feather dataframe,
but was just interpreted as
a generic object in
the CSV and dataframe.
Now, we could probably
further tweaks some of
these other datatypes to increase
speed a little bit
if we want to do,
dropping the integer
and float sizes.
But I don't want to give you
the thought that you should
pivot and start using
feather for everything.
It's very much under
active development and there are
some potential catches or
defaults that you might
not be expecting.
For instance, I
thought preserving
a multi index would
work, but it doesn't.
So if I take df _feather
and I set the index to
state and city and then I
try and write this
to a feather file,
I get an error.
The error is helpful but
the default behavior for CSVs
is actually different and
the two CSV function just
writes the columns
although of course not as
an index because there's
no metadata,
just regular columns.
Regardless, the feather is
a great format to watch
evolved and the bindings
across programming languages
means that there's potential for
high interoperability
and high-performance
of dataframe data structures.
In this lecture, we
covered a range of
data file formats for dataframes.
By far, the most
common is the CSV.
But it's useful to know that
there are other formats that
you have to work with and
the pandas supports them.
Excel files are very common
in large organizations,
pickle files are
quick to move between
Python processes and capture
all of the nuance of
the dataframe object.
An HDF5 and feather files have
their uses in more
specialized circumstances.